hello Community we're here back at
perplexity ey we here with deep research
and I want to show you what you should
be careful about what is working what is
not working and what might be a complete
failure if you use this the wrong way so
after 10 hours of playing around and
trying to understand here the pro and
the cons this is my question I said hey
perplexity I deep research why the
technical evaluation report and do this
on yourself no do this here under
performance of deep research and I don't
specify if it's Google if it's
perplexity or if it's openi deep
research for scientific insights from an
AI agent searching the internet and
arguing about the scientific findings
present in this report the pros and the
cons of a deep research eii engine and
why they might fail but fail not for the
internal AI hallucination we all no this
not for oh for not for the missing dep
of
reasoning but simply by the fact that
the resources found on the internet are
not verified and not fact checked and
you might say well of course but let's
see here if we let the system run for 3
minutes what are the inside by the eye
about itself no and the first surprise
here now you have to deep research you
have 26 steps if you want to see them
here beautiful 26 sources here need to
search the app prev search provided here
Dept of everything we see here the
Search terms we see here the Articles it
found here MIT horard beautifully and we
can scroll down looking search results
here that describe deep research here by
the 03 model multistep beautiful user
wants a report to focus here on the
failer points due to unverified sources
not the AI own hallucination and
reasoning because we know they're
hallucinating and they know about
internal reasoning I just want to know
how it all comes together where is the
source of
information so I need to highlight how
even if the AI reasoning is correct if
the sources it uses are unreliable the
output is flawed now this is now
following my polarization a little bit
too strong you see I don't want here
that you follow me
100% sometimes it produces incorrect
facts despite structured a report and
now let go so we we have here 23
resources so let's have 26 sources so
I'm so sorry and here we go now before
we look at your answer just look here at
the text here we have now a paper here
technical evaluation and this is
beautiful but now do you notice do you
spoty the first mistake it only focuses
here on open eyes deep
research and you want said why is it
ignoring itself it in itself DCI is deep
research and Google deep research was
even before
openi well it simply goes and searches
the internet and what people wrote in
the internet what people responded on
the
internet the more there is the more it
will focus on this stuff so you have
here um clear polarization here on
quantity over quality is this true so
let's have a look so we go only for
opening eyes research but then this is
absolutely ons spot Source verification
challenge in the scientific inside
generation this is absolutely what I
wanted beautiful he got it 100% right
let's have a look at the technical
architecture and the workflow yes this
is what I wanted so breaking complex
question into subqueries yeah using your
o3s okay open eye 280 billion parameter
reasoning model and the source of this
and this is beautiful is here number one
number one is data
Camp let's have a look at data
Camp okay not familiar with this
internet resource February 5th
2025 a guide with practical examples so
this was written here by Alex a data
science editor beautiful I don't know
this person but let's have a look at
this person what we know about is
nothing it's private I have no access to
this
person so our first source is somebody
in the internet if you know him great
maybe it's a perfect great guy but I
cannot verify anything about this person
so the first statement here is by some
Source I'm not familiar with second
deploying 8 to 12 agent threat to
simultaneously browse academic repost
this is great but then new sites and I
say uhoh you go with fox or go with CNN
and public
databases okay then cross referencing
beautiful so you wait this by the domain
Authority scores so I say okay open your
eye establish something like an
authority score for documents and then
you have a report synthesis generating
here the outputs beautiful and then the
system prioritize coverage over coration
you see processing about 200 pages per
average research session with a 92
milliseconds per page analysis speed do
you believe this what is the source five
five is data Global Hub I don't know
this data Global Hub this is it this is
the link
here that I
received do you believe this resource so
you might says hey you go there you find
it come on it's an article you just have
to invest yeah but I just go with the
link provided next one Benchmark
analysis I'm loving this you know you
only get one normally a benchmark
because you want to have this as a
marketing dominant Factor deep research
achieves 26% accuracy on Humanity's last
exam isn't this beautiful and then we
have here something by the way this is
from Source One and Only from Source One
and not other sources so we have one
source and this is it but even this one
seems to say I have to verify this now
error analysis
reveals that 38% of the incorrect
answers traced to outdated or retracted
studies cited as valid this is not what
you
want if you have here cited as valid
this this is definitely not what you
want and
40% this is not good then you have 22%
errors originating from non peer
reviewed prepr
treated as
authorative listen I know that allive
preprints are non authoritative okay if
you want to see this so more or less non
PR previewed but if you know the people
if you know the ORS maybe if you know
the institution or maybe just the head
of the department that is publishing
this I kind of know if I should trust
this or not if I encounter some complete
new article new ARS I just go into the
internet I know where they are at what
university at what laboratory I can
check them I see what they published
here I just have here this article and I
don't know if I trust them or
not yeah Flo data set from obscure repos
how should my L eye know what is a good
REO I understand that we have here
massive
mistakes Gaia Benchmark beautiful case
study case study by again this is Source
Number One Source number one
only CED 37 sources including eight pmet
articles three bioarchive PR prints and
16 manufacturing white
paper so I lit I went out on the
internet and found here from the
manufacturer here beautiful marketing
materials hey says H manufacturer our
product is the best product on the
market and of course the llm says Hey
wow I found some information about this
how gorgeous is it no oh yeah my little
poor
llm yeah the case study here failed to
flag conflicts of interest in 94% of
Industry sponsor
studies I understand how should this L I
know that certain persons or certain
institutes or certain
Institution are really the think tank of
certain industry
sectors a human might never look at this
and say hey this is the truth a human
might know about it and say hey this is
pure
marketing but how should a l eye do this
well there is a Formula but I show you
it is in a minute and then yeah for
example in this study they presented
here 2019 retracted nature paper as
current best
practice okay this this is this is not
really
great then we have the temporal decay in
Source relevance this is important if
you do academics so if we have here deep
research temporal awareness this is by
open ey here because we only looking at
Deep research by openi and our source is
again Source one so this is the master
Source here and thei is here referring
here primarily to One Source only a
person where we have no idea who this
person
is and they say hey temporal awareness
lags behind in the academic publishing
cycles for 2.3
years do you believe this I I can't
check this yeah maybe I if I go there
and I have a deep dive I would like to
have multiple sources if something is
stated to me here as a failer
mode okay next one Authority
misattribution okay yeah you might have
an Institutional bias you might
overweight the ivy league Affiliated
prence here you have yeah you have a
commercial influence here because 23% of
independent academic studies are traced
to Industry funded think tanks now what
a surprise so you see whatever there is
on the internet it is not the truth and
our little eye going out there hopeful
finding here correct scientific facts
comes back and yeah whatever they found
might be not what we are looking
for cross validation gaps I love this
parallel agent threats often Converge on
information Cascades rather than
conducting some real genuine
verification so what we have we just run
in Loops of multiple sources that
reference itself and therefore thei
thinks yeah this must be a true
information strength and limitation
beautiful okay 100 sources per report
versus human average of 12 yeah uh AI
with 100 Nvidia GPU can read reports
faster than any human can speed 11
minutes turnaround for task requiring
humans 3 hours absolutely believe in
this verification
shortcomings no crap test
integration and I said hey this sounds
interesting no this this is not
something that I seem to like this is
one static credibility ristics because
the system seems to treat here
educational and governmental sources
under the internet as uniformly
reliable despite domain spoofing risks
or missing fact checking protocols might
say hey why meter said fact checking is
not necessary anymore well in science
you better do fact checking otherwise
you will be
surprised closed loop training yeah
reinforcement learning rewards citation
volume over quality this is what we know
and again we have Source number one
isn't this beautiful so when you do this
deep research here you see here inherent
limitation it's not wrong but how should
the I know how much the humans love on
the Internet technical enhancement and
this is no nice because now we do have a
formula integrate here a credibility
scoring system using your the modified
crab
criteria now this is beautiful they came
up with a formula where they say Hey
listen our credibility is a simple
numerical value and we have here 0.3 of
the authority Factor 0.25 of the
currency 0.2 of the relevance factor
0.15 of the accuracy we wait the
accuracy with
0.15 and then on the purpose we have
0.1 so okay I understand that they try
at least to somehow focus on relevance
accuracy on
purpose yeah they would partner here
with other verification agencies but hey
who needs them anymore and then we have
a conclusion and I love this conclusion
look at this deep research revolutionary
literature synthesis and you say yeah
this is it yippe let's go and then deep
research inherits the vaps cacophony of
Truth and
misinformation and I think this is it
deep
research is based and of course it
inherits you the Reps cacaphony of Truth
and misinformation as published by us
humans as flooded here by Bots from
companies maybe from individuals maybe
from political groups that just share
misinformation and if you're an American
you might say hey we have to write a
free speech beautiful but this is what
you get back if you utilize your deep
research AI because this little AI has
no way of knowing here everything that a
human might know and yes you can
influence this little deep research AI
significantly so the path forward
requires tighter integration with
academic infrastructure and epistemic
humility gee I don't even know what this
means but recognizing that comprehensive
searching cannot compensate for
uncritical sourcing so you see Di is
aware of its own limitation and I kind
of loved this that we achieved this here
with perplexity I and you see such a
simple question that I have here at the
beginning hey what's going on what is
happening
here and yeah you found here technical
evaluation of open ey's deep research
but please note this is not only open
eyi and yes I know in the next year's
open ey will improve significantly on
this Google will improve on this and uh
perplexity will improve on this and this
is why we need those things to be
available to us and even if it's five
tries a day that we as an open source
Community we can experience this we can
learn from the shortcomings we can
improve it we can learn and see what's
not working and if I only have open ey
deep research where I have to pay 200
bucks a month and I might not get here
such a beautiful Insight I don't like
this propietary closed systems for this
particular reason it doesn't enable the
community to learn to learn it together
because each and every person will see
different aspects we'll find out
different other data and therefore
putting it all together we can improve
the systems much
faster and yeah credibility of sources
we have 26 sources and you might say hey
great but do you know all 26 sources do
you know the people who wrote for these
26 sources you might s a block by Google
this is great I don't know I have to see
the ARs I have to read it I have to use
my experience that I have in the field
that I tell you hey I believe this and
then I go and I produce a YouTube video
and show my viewers and my subscribers
hey look I found something that I fact
check to the best of my knowledge I
think I know this people I know what
they published here in the past and they
have come up with some new ideas those
ideas are kind of in line with the
current EI resear search path with this
Avenue that we all encounter right now
so this is why I do a video for you so
you see this is interesting because it
brings me back here
justification why should I continue with
YouTube videos If we have this why
should anybody continue with YouTube
videos or
explanations for this EI research for
example because you just went online you
go to an eii provider you go to to deep
research and you find everything what
you need over
there well it's not that easy so nice I
found for myself a little new fact that
I really enjoy and if you enjoy this
video hey why not subscribe because the
next video is all with in the pipeline